# krdl
## Ontology Justification Explanations Using the Forgetting Operation

This project facilitates explanation for subsumption justification in ontologies using the forgetting operation.

The justifications are generated by OWL-API. For each of the justificaiton we apply forgetting using the LETHE library, with the aim to make the justifications more understandable.

All the results are exported in a directory called `<ontology_name>_exports` where `<ontology_name>` is the initial ontology.

The projects experiments with various heuristics for forgetting: 

1. Random 1-by-1, in which symbols are forgotten 1 by 1 in random order
2. In decreasing order of frequency of occurence in the axioms in the initial justification.


### Running the tool

The tool needs at least JRE 11 to run.

The main class to run is DLExplanation. 

To run the program, use the following command line options:

1. The ontology file (required)
2. Either of the options 1, 2 or 3:
  - Option 1 - to generate all the direct and inferred subsumptions. 
  The results are exported in a file called `subclasses.nt` in `<ontology_name>_exports` directory.
  - Option 2 - to generate all justifications for the subsumptions generated with option 1
  For each of the subsumptions, there can be more justifications. All the justifications are
  exported in OWL format in files named `<ontology_name>_exports/justif-<subsumption_id>-<justification_id>.owl`
  - Option 3 - to generate all explanations by forgetting to all justifications generated with option 2. 
  If option 3 is provided, then another 2 arguments need to be provided, representing:
    - The forgetting method supported by LETHE:
         - Method 1 - `AlchTBoxForgetter`
         - Method 2 - `ShqTBoxForgetter`
         - Method 3 - `AlcOntologyForgetter`
    - The forgetting strategy: 
        - 1 forgetting entities 1-by-1 in random order
        - 2 forgetting entities that occur most frequently in initial justification the last
 The explanations by forgetting are exported in human readable format in files named
 `<ontology_name>_exports/<forgetting_method>/expl<strategy_id>-<subsumption_id>-<justification_id>.owl`  

Example usage:

    > java -jar krdl.jar my_path/pizza_super_simple.owl 1
    > java -jar krdl.jar my_path/pizza_super_simple.owl 2
    > java -jar krdl.jar my_path/pizza_super_simple.owl  3 1 2


